p1-NInt/Cordell/project 1/README.md, before:

# Introduction

This project demonstrates and explores several numeric integration techniques.

## Background Theory
The first technique explored is the trapezoid rule. The trapezoid rule takes the average of the leftpoint and rightpoint rules. These methods incorporate Reimann sums which split the area under the curve into N rectangles and adds up the area of each rectangle. The height of each rectangle is typically taken at the left, right, or middle of the rectangle--- hence the names of the rules: leftpoint, rightpoint and midpoint. As one might imagine, the estimate becomes more accurate at higher values of N. Specifically, as N increases the error of leftpoint or rightpoint decreases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N}$ and the error of midpoint or trapezoid decreases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N^{2}}$.

Simpson's method is a weighted average of the midpoint and trapezoid rule where midpoint is weighted by a factor of $\frac{2}{3}$ and the trapezoid is weighted by a factor of $\frac{1}{3}$. It is the most accurate out of the methods so far. As N increases, the error reduces by a factor of $\frac{1}{N^{4}}$.

The Guassian quadrature method is a more refined and much more interesting method than any of the previous methods that revolve around Reimann sums. It utilizes Legendre polynomials to represent the integrand. Recall that Legendre polynomials are an orthonormal set of polynomials as shown in Fig. 1, and so they can be used to represent any polynomial exactly. Furthermore, if the integrand isn't a polynomial, Legendre polynomials can still be utilized to approximate it. The Guassian quadrature method approximates the integrand using Legendre polynomials and then integrates the constructed polynomial exactly. This is expressed as: 

```math
\int_{-1}^{1} \mathrm{d}x\, f(x) \approx \sum_{i=1}^N c_{N,i} f\left(x_{N,i}\right)                 \qquad(1)
```

where $`x_{N,i}`$ are the sample points chosen at the roots of the Legendre polynomials and the weights are given by

```math
c_{i,n}=\frac{1}{P_n^{\prime}(x_{N,i})}\int_{-1}^1\frac{P_n(x)}{x-x_{N,i}} \mathrm{d}x                  \qquad(2)
```
<br>
<br>
<br>
![My plot](../Project%201/LegendrePolynomials.png)
Figure 1: Legendre polynomials subplots of $`P_i`$, $`P_j`$, and $`P_i\cdot P_j`$. There are 16 subplots of Legendre polynomials for i and j in the range 1-4. The area under the curve can be observed for each of the i=j subplots on the diagonal as well as the i $`\neq`$ j subplots off diagonal. The areas under the i = j curves look to be approximately 1. Meanwhile, the areas under the i $`\neq`$ j seem to be about 0. This is the visualization of the integral of $`P_i\cdot P_j`$ from -1 to 1 equals the kroenecker delta function.

## Intructions
Code.py is a script that demonstrates the numerical integration techniques discussed above.

To run the code.py script open the command prompt from the directory you have the it in:
```cmd
conda activate [the name of your environment]
python code.py
```
It outputs the estimated result of the integral 

```math
I = \int_0^2 \mathrm{d}x\, \sin^2\left(\sqrt{100x}\right)                   \qquad(3)
```

using the trapezoid rule along with the error and number of subintervals. Then, it outputs the estimated result using the Simpson rule. Lastly, it outputs these results using the Gaussian quadrature.

# Procedure
Here are some highlight-worthy segments of code:

```python
def leftpoint(f,a,b,N):
    mysum = 0
    h = f
    x_array = np.linspace(a, b, N)
    w = (b-a)/(N-1)
    A_array = h(x_array)*w
    mysum = np.sum(A_array)
    mysum = mysum - A_array[N-1]      
    return mysum

def rightpoint(f,a,b,N):
    mysum = 0
    h = f
    x_array = np.linspace(a, b, N)
    w = (b-a)/(N-1)
    A_array = h(x_array)*w
    mysum = np.sum(A_array)
    mysum = mysum - A_array[0]     
    return mysum 

def trapezoid(f, a, b, N):
    return 0.5* (leftpoint(f, a, b, N) + rightpoint(f, a, b, N))
```

The leftpoint and rightpoint functions segment the region being integrated over into N-1 equal width rectangles. The height is calculated using the value of the integrand when x equals the left or right end of each rectangle. The area of each rectangle is calculated and summed to approximate the integral.

```python
def quad(a, b, N):
    roots, weights = sp.special.roots_legendre(N)
    x = ((b-a)*roots/2)+(a+b)/2
    dx_over_du = 2/(b-a)
    return dx_over_du* np.sum(weights*sin(x))
```

The Gaussian quadrature function selects the specific sample points and their relative weights using the scipy special functions library. The integral is parameterized from -1 to 1 because that is where the Legendre polynomials are defined. Then the results are summed over following Eq. (1).

# Analysis
Table 1 compares the approximated results of Integral (3) using the trapezoid rule and the Gaussian quadrature at subintervals incremented by powers of 2. The Guassian quadrature estimate reaches e-15 error at N=16, wheras the Trapezoid rule increases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N^{2}}$ with e-4 error at N=512. Although over a very very large number of subintervals the trapezoid rule can theoretically reach higher precision, the Guassian quadrature is much more practical and efficient.

Table 1: Trapezoid and Guassian quadrature estimates of Integral (3) at N subintverals.

|     N     | Trapezoid Estimate         | Trapezoid Error               | Guassian Quad Estimate        | Guassian Quad Error           |
|-----------|----------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 2         | 0.9999753123966121         | 0.0057272304291179355         | 0.04681225905124554           | 0.9588902837744845            |
| 4         | 1.421250657401599          | 0.41554811457586904           | 1.4373009028449348            | 0.4315983600192048            |
| 8         | 1.0250832979205577         | 0.01938075509482773           | 1.045246394223079             | 0.03954385139734895           |
| 16        | 0.9467370655877161         | 0.05896547723801393           | 1.0057025428257274            | 2.6645352591003757e-15        |
| 32        | 0.9770282378161866         | 0.028674305009543377          | 1.0057025428257247            | 5.329070518200751e-15         |
| 64        | 0.9976716296671655         | 0.008030913158564523          | 1.0057025428257258            | 4.218847493575595e-15         |
| 128       | 1.003657838280232          | 0.0020447045454980994         | 1.005702542825726             | 3.9968028886505635e-15        |
| 256       | 1.00519113947139           | 0.0005114033543400787         | 1.0057025428257265            | 3.552713678800501e-15         |
| 512       | 1.0055749301202703         | 0.00012761270545968983        | 1.005702542825715             | 1.509903313490213e-14         |

# Extension 1

Commit message:

Added an Extension 1 section
talked about extension 1 in my write up

p1-NInt/Cordell/project 1/README.md, after:

# Introduction

This project demonstrates and explores several numeric integration techniques.

## Background Theory
The first technique explored is the trapezoid rule. The trapezoid rule takes the average of the leftpoint and rightpoint rules. These methods incorporate Reimann sums which split the area under the curve into N rectangles and adds up the area of each rectangle. The height of each rectangle is typically taken at the left, right, or middle of the rectangle--- hence the names of the rules: leftpoint, rightpoint and midpoint. As one might imagine, the estimate becomes more accurate at higher values of N. Specifically, as N increases the error of leftpoint or rightpoint decreases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N}$ and the error of midpoint or trapezoid decreases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N^{2}}$.

Simpson's method is a weighted average of the midpoint and trapezoid rule where midpoint is weighted by a factor of $\frac{2}{3}$ and the trapezoid is weighted by a factor of $\frac{1}{3}$. It is the most accurate out of the methods so far. As N increases, the error reduces by a factor of $\frac{1}{N^{4}}$.

The Guassian quadrature method is a more refined and much more interesting method than any of the previous methods that revolve around Reimann sums. It utilizes Legendre polynomials to represent the integrand. Recall that Legendre polynomials are an orthonormal set of polynomials as shown in Fig. 1, and so they can be used to represent any polynomial exactly. Furthermore, if the integrand isn't a polynomial, Legendre polynomials can still be utilized to approximate it. The Guassian quadrature method approximates the integrand using Legendre polynomials and then integrates the constructed polynomial exactly. This is expressed as: 

```math
\int_{-1}^{1} \mathrm{d}x\, f(x) \approx \sum_{i=1}^N c_{N,i} f\left(x_{N,i}\right)                 \qquad(1)
```

where $`x_{N,i}`$ are the sample points chosen at the roots of the Legendre polynomials and the weights are given by

```math
c_{i,n}=\frac{1}{P_n^{\prime}(x_{N,i})}\int_{-1}^1\frac{P_n(x)}{x-x_{N,i}} \mathrm{d}x                  \qquad(2)
```
<br>
<br>
<br>
![Legendre Plot](../Project%201/LegendrePolynomials.png)
Figure 1: Legendre polynomials subplots of $`P_i`$, $`P_j`$, and $`P_i\cdot P_j`$. There are 16 subplots of Legendre polynomials for i and j in the range 1-4. The area under the curve can be observed for each of the i=j subplots on the diagonal as well as the i $`\neq`$ j subplots off diagonal. The areas under the i = j curves look to be approximately 1. Meanwhile, the areas under the i $`\neq`$ j seem to be about 0. This is the visualization of the integral of $`P_i\cdot P_j`$ from -1 to 1 equals the kroenecker delta function.

## Intructions
Code.py is a script that demonstrates the numerical integration techniques discussed above.

To run the code.py script open the command prompt from the directory you have the it in:
```cmd
conda activate [the name of your environment]
python code.py
```
It outputs the estimated result of the integral 

```math
I = \int_0^2 \mathrm{d}x\, \sin^2\left(\sqrt{100x}\right)                   \qquad(3)
```

using the trapezoid rule along with the error and number of subintervals. Then, it outputs the estimated result using the Simpson rule. Lastly, it outputs these results using the Gaussian quadrature.

# Procedure
Here are some highlight-worthy segments of code:

```python
def leftpoint(f,a,b,N):
    mysum = 0
    h = f
    x_array = np.linspace(a, b, N)
    w = (b-a)/(N-1)
    A_array = h(x_array)*w
    mysum = np.sum(A_array)
    mysum = mysum - A_array[N-1]      
    return mysum

def rightpoint(f,a,b,N):
    mysum = 0
    h = f
    x_array = np.linspace(a, b, N)
    w = (b-a)/(N-1)
    A_array = h(x_array)*w
    mysum = np.sum(A_array)
    mysum = mysum - A_array[0]     
    return mysum 

def trapezoid(f, a, b, N):
    return 0.5* (leftpoint(f, a, b, N) + rightpoint(f, a, b, N))
```

The leftpoint and rightpoint functions segment the region being integrated over into N-1 equal width rectangles. The height is calculated using the value of the integrand when x equals the left or right end of each rectangle. The area of each rectangle is calculated and summed to approximate the integral.

```python
def quad(a, b, N):
    roots, weights = sp.special.roots_legendre(N)
    x = ((b-a)*roots/2)+(a+b)/2
    dx_over_du = 2/(b-a)
    return dx_over_du* np.sum(weights*sin(x))
```

The Gaussian quadrature function selects the specific sample points and their relative weights using the scipy special functions library. The integral is parameterized from -1 to 1 because that is where the Legendre polynomials are defined. Then the results are summed over following Eq. (1).

# Analysis
Table 1 compares the approximated results of Integral (3) using the trapezoid rule and the Gaussian quadrature at subintervals incremented by powers of 2. The Guassian quadrature estimate reaches e-15 error at N=16, wheras the Trapezoid rule increases proportionally to $\frac{1}{N^{2}}$ with e-4 error at N=512. Although over a very very large number of subintervals the trapezoid rule can theoretically reach higher precision, the Guassian quadrature is much more practical and efficient.

Table 1: Trapezoid and Guassian quadrature estimates of Integral (3) at N subintverals.

|     N     | Trapezoid Estimate         | Trapezoid Error               | Guassian Quad Estimate        | Guassian Quad Error           |
|-----------|----------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|-------------------------------|
| 2         | 0.9999753123966121         | 0.0057272304291179355         | 0.04681225905124554           | 0.9588902837744845            |
| 4         | 1.421250657401599          | 0.41554811457586904           | 1.4373009028449348            | 0.4315983600192048            |
| 8         | 1.0250832979205577         | 0.01938075509482773           | 1.045246394223079             | 0.03954385139734895           |
| 16        | 0.9467370655877161         | 0.05896547723801393           | 1.0057025428257274            | 2.6645352591003757e-15        |
| 32        | 0.9770282378161866         | 0.028674305009543377          | 1.0057025428257247            | 5.329070518200751e-15         |
| 64        | 0.9976716296671655         | 0.008030913158564523          | 1.0057025428257258            | 4.218847493575595e-15         |
| 128       | 1.003657838280232          | 0.0020447045454980994         | 1.005702542825726             | 3.9968028886505635e-15        |
| 256       | 1.00519113947139           | 0.0005114033543400787         | 1.0057025428257265            | 3.552713678800501e-15         |
| 512       | 1.0055749301202703         | 0.00012761270545968983        | 1.005702542825715             | 1.509903313490213e-14         |

# Extension 1
As shown in Fig. 2, the Guassian quadrature reaches e-4 error at N=16384, whereas after the substitution it reaches e-15 error at N=16. Furthermore, there is a trend where the error decreases by $\frac{1}{2}$ as N increases as powers of 2 before the substitution. Following this trend, we would expect for it to reach e-10 error around N=$2^{31}$. I believe the reason that this is the case has to do with the fact that it is integrating over a singularity, and applying the substitution gets rid of the singularity. Without getting too much into the theory behind Gaussian quadratures (mainly because I don't know all the details lol), this makes sense because polynomials do not have singularities. After all, the Guassian quadrature approximates the integrand as a polynomial.

![Extension plot](Extension1.png)
Figure 2: Output of Extension 1 code. It shows the number of subintervals, Guassian quadrature estimate, and error before and after applying the substitution.
